docs(inside-rust): add rustup 1.30 release cycle plans (#1856)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: content/inside-rust/rustup-update-1.30.md

+++
path = "inside-rust/2026/06/29/rustup-update-1.30"

> title = "Rustup Update: Our Plans for the 1.30 Release Cycle"

Reviewer: The title casing feels a little shouty to me and seems off-brand for the Rust blog(s).

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Author: @djc I just checked https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/ and it seems like there is no rule for this. Of course I can switch to regular casing.

authors = ["rami3l"]

[extra]
team = "The Rustup Team"
team_url = "https://rust-lang.org/governance/teams/dev-tools/#team-rustup"
+++

> With this post, we summarize the centers of interest of `t-rustup` in the

Reviewer: I don't think "centers of interest" is a common expression in (US) English? Maybe "focus areas"?

Is this seeking to inform the community and/or ask them for feedback on their plans? Maybe make that more explicit.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Author: Nice catch, I've just reworded the whole paragraph.

ongoing release cycle leading to the future 1.30.0 release, hoping to make it
more visible to the community of what is going on with the rustup project's
recent development, as well as how you can potentially help making rustup
better.

## Ongoing Changes

### [Simplification of download & TLS backends](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3790)

Since a long time ago, the simplification of the rustup codebase has been a
recurring topic for the team. One particular area of interest is the downloader
subsystem, since supporting the combination of different download and TLS
backends has been a source of significant maintenance burden.

So far, we have made significant progress towards establishing the new
defaults: the `reqwest` download backend and the `rustls` TLS backend have been
the default and recommended choice since 2019 and 2025 respectively, and
starting from 2025, the uses of the deprecated `curl` download backend and the
`native` TLS backend have been triggering deprecation warnings.

In this release cycle, we have decided to take the next step in this effort by
removing the `curl` download backend, which has recently been merged and is

> planned to be shipped in the 1.30 release which is expected to happen in 2027.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release cycle, we have decided to take the next step in this effort by
removing the `curl` download backend. This change has recently been merged and is
planned to be shipped in the 1.30 release which is expected to happen in 2027.
```
Otherwise it read like the curl backend was recently merged.

In addition, the `native` TLS backend has also been a difficult subject for the
team especially due to the difficulties of building and/or linking OpenSSL
consistently across multiple platforms. There are currently no plans to remove
it notably due to Linux packaging policies, but it might be downgraded to
"guaranteed to build" support from a certain point on in the future.

We encourage every user to switch to the `reqwest` download backend and the
`rustls` TLS backend if they haven't already done so (if you haven't seen any
related deprecation warnings, everything is good already!). If there are
specific reasons preventing you from making the switch, please let us know

> immediately via an issue and link to the previous

Reviewer: I'd drop the "immediately" here.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

[CfT](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3806).

> ### [Refining the auto installation behavior]

Reviewer: I feel like this section might deserve coming before the download stuff?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Back when rustup 1.28.0 was released, the auto installation of active
toolchains has been disabled both in `rustup` and proxy (such as `rustc` and
`cargo`) invocations, which was a significant change in behavior that wasn't
well communicated to users, and we would like to sincerely apologize for having
caused a lot of frustration because of that.

In response to this breakage, the old default behavior has been [re-enabled in
1.28.1](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2025/03/04/Rustup-1.28.1). However, it does
seem that old behavior would be clearly unnecessary in certain places, such as
in the following example with rustup 1.27.1, where rustup must "install the

> active toolchain first in order to remove a target"while it should have simply

Reviewer: `target"while` probably looks wrong? Not sure what the quotes are doing here.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Author: Reworded.

bailed out:

```console
> rustup --version
rustup 1.27.1 (54dd3d00f 2024-04-24)
info: This is the version for the rustup toolchain manager, not the rustc compiler.
info: The currently active `rustc` version is `rustc 1.81.0 (eeb90cda1 2024-09-04)`

> rustup +beta target remove aarch64-apple-darwin
info: syncing channel updates for 'beta-aarch64-unknown-linux-musl'
1007.6 KiB / 1007.6 KiB (100 %) 567.4 KiB/s in  1s ETA:  0s
info: latest update on 2025-09-28, rust version 1.91.0-beta.4 (aa7859c0d 2025-09-27)
info: downloading component 'cargo'
^C
```

> This is why we are planning to re-disable it in some scenarios in the hope of

Reviewer: I think this should briefly summarize the extent to which we're redisabling it (as in, the next paragraph) before/in place of stating this. Right now this gives the impression that we're redoing the change from 1.28.0 which is very much not the case.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Author: @djc Thanks! I've reworded the whole section.

> being able to do this in a more intuitive and far less disrpuptive way.

Reviewer: "disrpuptive"

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Recently, a change has been
[merged](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/pull/4840) that disables the
auto-installation of the active toolchain in `rustup-init` and `rustup`
invocations (with some exceptions, see the link for more info); it will be in

> effect starting from rustup 1.30.

Reviewer: I think it's worth explaining briefly that (a) proxy invocations (notably `cargo`) are unaffected, (b) most subcommands don't need this.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

If you have any concerns regarding the above change, please let us know in the
[issue thread][Refining the auto installation behavior]. In the meantime,
_extra deprecation warnings are planned for the upcoming releases of 1.29_,
which should provide everyone with more time to prepare.

[Refining the auto installation behavior]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4836

## To Be Worked on Shortly

> Below is a list of the things that the team plans to be work on in the near

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a list of the things that the team plans to work on in the near
```

future:

1. [XDG Paths Support](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/247): This is our GSoC 2026 Project.
1. [Notify users of possible updates](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3688)
1. [Signing & mirroring support](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/2029)

## Focus Areas Without Progress

> Below is a list of the things that are on the team's radar but the progress

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a list of objectives on the team's radar where progress has been limited:
```

having been made on them remains limited:

> 1. [Artifact signing](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/2027)

Reviewer: Is this roughly in priority order?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

Author: @djc Yes, this part is synchronized with the previous document (which you have reviewed) which also contains this list.

1. [Process safety](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/988)
1. [Toolchain identification & deduplication](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4663)
1. [Toolchain content verification & repair](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3940)
1. [Enhanced concurrency in toolchain installation](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/731)
1. [MSVC environment setup improvements](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4446)
1. [JSON output mode](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3434)
1. [Trusted directories](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3935)

## Contributions Welcome

### [Restriction of toolchain names]

In the past, rustup used to put nearly no restrictions on legal toolchain
names, which led to a lot of unnecessary complexities. Notably, this has caused
some [phishing concerns](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4053) and
has also prevented us from [allowing certain toolchain names to bear a special
meaning](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4391#issuecomment-4274125954).

> To improve the current situation, we are planning to restrict the toolchain

Reviewer: I think you should drop "the" in "the toolchain names".

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/1856/d62192b0bc010513fabdbdf0e0ad5a32f0b299b3..d8c20275202c565416c291e792cce6e314359921)*

+++
path = "inside-rust/2026/06/29/rustup-update-1.30"
title = "Rustup update: our plans for the 1.30 release cycle"
authors = ["rami3l"]

[extra]
team = "The Rustup Team"
team_url = "https://rust-lang.org/governance/teams/dev-tools/#team-rustup"
+++

This blog post is `t-rustup`'s first attempt of providing a more transparent
view of the team's current work.

Here, we summarize the focus areas of `t-rustup` in the ongoing release cycle
leading to the future 1.30.0 release, hoping to inform you of our future plans,
and ask for your feedback to help us make rustup better.

## Ongoing Changes

### [Refining the auto installation behavior]

Back when rustup 1.28.0 was released, the auto installation of active

> toolchains has been disabled both in `rustup` and proxy (such as `rustc` and

Reviewer: Should we provide a bit more context on what the feature is doing? Maybe replace "auto installation" with "implicit installation"? (There's also inconsistent use of "auto installation" and "auto-installation" throughout the post.)

Author: > Maybe replace "auto installation" with "implicit installation"?

@djc The flag is already called `RUSTUP_AUTO_INSTALL` so I don't want to cause more confusion by using a different name.

Reviewer: IMO environment variable naming is very different from prose, and the environment variable isn't even mentioned in this post? Doesn't seem like a strong argument to me.

Author: Fair enough, I have added dedicated description sections for the background of this feature.

caused a lot of frustration because of that.

In response to this breakage, the old default behavior has been [re-enabled in
1.28.1](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2025/03/04/Rustup-1.28.1). However, it does
seem that old behavior would be clearly unnecessary in certain places, such as
in the following example with rustup 1.27.1, where rustup must install the
active toolchain before removing a target while it should have bailed out:

```console
> rustup --version
rustup 1.27.1 (54dd3d00f 2024-04-24)
info: This is the version for the rustup toolchain manager, not the rustc compiler.
info: The currently active `rustc` version is `rustc 1.81.0 (eeb90cda1 2024-09-04)`

> rustup +beta target remove aarch64-apple-darwin
info: syncing channel updates for 'beta-aarch64-unknown-linux-musl'
1007.6 KiB / 1007.6 KiB (100 %) 567.4 KiB/s in  1s ETA:  0s
info: latest update on 2025-09-28, rust version 1.91.0-beta.4 (aa7859c0d 2025-09-27)
info: downloading component 'cargo'
^C
```

To make sure that rustup's user experience stays intuitive and that any future
change would be executed as smoothly as possible, starting from 1.30, we would

> like to [disable](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/pull/4840)

Reviewer: This sentence feels overly long and apologetic, maybe tighten it down to "To make sure rustup is not doing unnecessary work, we would like to .. starting from rustup 1.30."

auto-installation of the active toolchain in the `rustup-init` and `rustup`
invocations when unnecessary (for a complete list of influenced subcommands,
please refer to the previous link).

With the new behavior, the above example would simply fail, which should feel
more natural:

```console
> rustup +beta target remove aarch64-apple-darwin
error: toolchain 'beta-aarch64-unknown-linux-musl' is not installed
...
```

To avoid further confusions, we would like to stress a few points regarding
this change and its potential impact:

- We are NOT redoing the 1.28.0 breakage. Notably, the auto-installation is NOT

>   influenced in proxy invocations (such as `rustc` and `cargo`) in any way.

Reviewer: Maybe reword this to be more like: "Since we're preserving implicit installation on proxy invocations like `rustc` and `cargo`, this should not cause widespread breakage as seen when 1.28.0 was released."

- As it turns out, most cases where `rustup-init` or `rustup` is called don't
  require the active toolchain to be installed, so we would expect the
  disruptions caused by this change to be minimal, since most of you won't be

>   using the influenced subcommands in that particular way.

Reviewer: Maybe "Most cases where `rustup-init` or `rustup` are invoked don't require the active toolchain to be installed, so we expect the disruption caused by this change to be minimal."

- In the rare case where you have been using `rustup show` or similar commands
  to install a certain toolchain, it is recommended to use the new `rustup install`

>   command instead.

Reviewer: "Instead of using commands like `rustup show` to trigger toolchain installation, we recommend using `rustup install` instead."

- For the upcoming releases of 1.29, if you have triggered auto-installation in
  any of the influenced subcommands, rustup will print a deprecation warning to
  inform you of the upcoming change. This should provide you with more time to

>   prepare before the change is shipped in 1.30.

Reviewer: "In future 1.29 releases, triggering implicit installation in any of the relevant rustup subcommands, rustup will print a deprecation warning to inform you of the upcoming change."

(I feel like the last sentence would be superfluous?)

If you still have any concerns regarding the above change, please let us know
in the [issue thread][Refining the auto installation behavior].

[Refining the auto installation behavior]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/4836

### [Simplification of download & TLS backends](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup/issues/3790)

Since a long time ago, the simplification of the rustup codebase has been a
recurring topic for the team. One particular area of interest is the downloader
subsystem, since supporting the combination of different download and TLS
backends has been a source of significant maintenance burden.

So far, we have made significant progress towards establishing the new
defaults: the `reqwest` download backend and the `rustls` TLS backend have been
the default and recommended choice since 2019 and 2025 respectively, and
starting from 2025, the uses of the deprecated `curl` download backend and the
`native` TLS backend have been triggering deprecation warnings.

In this release cycle, we have decided to take the next step in this effort by
removing the `curl` download backend. This change has recently been merged and is

> planned to be shipped in the 1.30 release which is expected to happen in 2027.

Reviewer: Why in 2027? Feels like we could ship it this year.

Author: @djc I expect to cut the beta around 26Q4 and ship the new release in 27Q1 to make room for finalization of the GSoC changes, that's also what happened last year?

Reviewer: GSoC itself runs until August, right? How much work do you expect this "finalization" to take?

IMO it would be better not to commit to clear timeline, maybe something like "4 to 8 months".

Author: > GSoC itself runs until August, right? How much work do you expect this "finalization" to take?

@djc The official timeline ends at early September, but it usually ends in late September to October here, since most mid-scoped projects will be granted an extension of 2-6 weeks.

Author: I've changed it to 4 to 8 months as you have suggested, although finding time to polish this post alone has taken me more than one month, I really don't know if any more guarantees can be made here 😞
